<a href="{{ '/' | relative_url }}" class="home-button">üè† Home</a>

# EU CyberNet Summer School 2025 

Cyber Crisis Management: Navigating Disinformation and Cyber Attacks in
the AI Era

13 - 15 August 2025

Venue: Berlin, Germany

Background Note and Programme

Context

EU CyberNet (EUCN) has established, so far, a cyber security community
of 500+ experts on topics such as cybersecurity, cybercrime, cyber
diplomacy, cyber defence and other related fields to assess partner
countries' needs, organise training courses and offer expertise to
support various initiatives around the world. Keeping cyber experts
trained on current issues is crucial for several reasons.

First, due to a dynamic threat landscape, ongoing training ensures that
cyber experts are equipped to understanding and addressing latest
challenges, but also to staying informed about advanced methods to
implement preventative and even defence mechanisms, or about regulatory
changes to reduce risks for non-compliance and potential legal
consequences.


Second, training helps cyber experts on how to improve incident response
capabilities in minimising damage, contain threats and ensure swift
recovery. It also provides the avenue for knowledge sharing and
networking.


In today's interconnected world, disinformation has emerged as a potent
weapon, capable of destabilising societies and organisations alike. One
of the most pressing concerns is **the rise of AI- driven disinformation
campaigns** that affect cyber resilient societies. With sophisticated
tools capable of generating deepfake videos and realistic synthetic
media, false narratives can be crafted with alarming accuracy.
AI-powered chatbots and social media automation further enable the rapid
dissemination of misleading content, making it harder to distinguish
between truth and deception.<sup>[1]</sup>

Another challenge is the **erosion of trust in institutions**.
Governments, businesses and media organisations are frequent targets of
disinformation campaigns, designed to create confusion and diminish
public confidence. When a cyber crisis occurs, misinformation can spread
faster than factual reports, delaying response efforts and exacerbating
the damage.<sup>[2]</sup> This not only impacts decision- makers but also
influences public perception, sometimes leading to panic or misguided
reactions.

**Social media platforms** play a significant role in amplifying disinformation. AI-powered bots can generate thousands of posts within minutes, pushing misleading content into mainstream



conversations. The viral nature of false information often means that by
the time fact-checkers step in, the damage has already been
done.<sup>[3]</sup> In this way, malicious actors exploit human psychology,
knowing that people are more likely to believe and share emotionally
charged content without verification.


Furthermore, disinformation is increasingly used **in conjunction with
cyberattacks** as a form of psychological warfare. In some cases,
attackers deploy misleading narratives to divert attention from an
ongoing cyber breach or to manipulate stock markets and financial
systems.<sup>[4]</sup> AI-generated phishing emails, tailored to deceive
individuals with personalised content, significantly enhance the
effectiveness of cyber intrusions.<sup>[5]</sup> This convergence of cyber
threats and disinformation strategies creates a complex battlefield for
cybersecurity professionals, requiring a multidimensional approach to
crisis management.<sup>[6]</sup>

The integration of AI in disinformation campaigns has increased the
complexity of cyber crisis response efforts, necessitating proactive
detection, public resilience, regulatory measures and strategic
communication frameworks. Addressing these challenges requires a
collaborative effort among governments, private sectors and civil
society to mitigate risks and uphold information integrity, reason why
training experts to better advise these institutions on these topics is
crucial.

Training Audience

The training will be offered to a group of **40 experts from the Experts
Pool of EU CyberNet**. The purpose of the summer school is to advance
knowledge and skills of the participants on the current trends as well
as mitigation strategies to addressing disinformation in cyber crisis
management, particularly in the age of AI.

The **target audience** are experts either dealing with disinformation
and/or cyber crisis management issues and who wish to develop further
this knowledge through theory and practice. The participants preferably
consider themselves in the future as **EUCN trainers**, ready to respond
to various requests on disinformation in cyber crisis management in the
future.

Training Objectives

-   Define disinformation and distinguish it from misinformation and
    propaganda

-   Explain how AI contributes to the creation and spread of
    disinformation

-   Explain how cyber resilience is hindered by disinformation

-   Utilise AI-driven threat intelligence tools to identify
    cyber-enabled disinformation in real- time

-   Analyse real-world case studies of disinformation during cyber
    crises

-   Evaluate how disinformation affects trust in institutions and
    decision-making

-   Implement rapid response mechanisms to counter false narratives
    during cyber crises

-   Understand the role of social media in amplifying disinformation
    during crises

-   Create effective crisis communication strategies to mitigate
    disinformation's impact

-   Develop protocols for detecting and mitigating disinformation in
    cyber incident response

-   Examine current regulations and ethical concerns regarding
    AI-generated disinformation


[1] Chesney, R., & Citron, D. K. (2019). Deepfakes: A looming
challenge for privacy, democracy, and national security. *California Law
Review*, 1753-1776.

[2] Zannettou, S., Caulfield, T., De Cristofaro, E., Kourtellis,
N., Leontiadis, I., Sirivianos, M., & Stringhini, G. (2019).
Disinformation warfare: Understanding state-sponsored trolls on Twitter
and their influence on the Web. *Proceedings of the World Wide Web
Conference*.

[3] Ferrara, E. (2020). Manipulation and abuse on social media.
*ACM SIGWEB Newsletter*.

[4] Aro, J. (2016). The cyberspace war: propaganda and trolling as
warfare tools. *European View*, 15(1), 121-132

[5] Berghel, H. (2017). Alt-News and Post-Truths in the Age of
Trump. *Computer*, 50(4), 110-114.

[6] [https://](http://www.ft.com/content/0aa9725d-e423-4a6b-b842-866ad4541dc2?utm_source=chatgpt.com)[www.ft.com/content/0aa9725d-e423-4a6b-b842-866ad4541dc2?utm_source=chatgpt.com](http://www.ft.com/content/0aa9725d-e423-4a6b-b842-866ad4541dc2?utm_source=chatgpt.com)

Training Format

EU CyberNet in partnership with the German Federal Foreign Office
will organise its 4th iteration of the **Summer School**
during **13-15 August 2025** in **Berlin, Germany**. This year's
**2.5-days training** will focus on **Cyber Crisis Management:
Navigating Disinformation and Cyber Attacks in the AI era**.

## Course Programme 

### Day 0 Tuesday 12 August 2025 

18:00 -- 20:00 Icebreaker

### Day 1 Wednesday 13 August 2025 

08:30 -- 09:00 Arrival and Registration

09:00 -- 09:30 Welcoming Remarks

Module: AD.WELCOME

Speakers Led by Cecilia Popa, EU CyberNet Experts & Community Lead

and Felix Kroll, Cyber Foreign Policy Staff, German Federal Foreign
Office

09:30 -- 09:40 Overview of the Course

Module: DI.INTRO.1

Instructor Led by Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor

09:40 -- 10:00 Defending Democratic Information in the Age of
Algorithmic Manipulation

Module: DI.INTRO.2 

Instructor Led by Stephen Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor

10:00 -- 10:20 Cyber Crisis Management in the European Union

Module: DI.CYBER.1 [Slides plus Notes](DI.CYBER.1.pdf)

Instructors Led by Rosaria Talarico, Guest Speaker

and Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor

10:20 -- 10:40 The Role of Social Media in Spreading Disinformation,
Reducing Trust and Amplifying Cyber Crises

Module: DI.SOCIAL.1 + DI.TRUST.1

Instructors Led by Rosaria Talarico, Guest Speaker

and Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor

10:40 -- 11:10 Family Photo + Coffee Break

11:10 -- 11:40 Trends in Foreign Information Manipulation and
Interference

Module: DI.CASES.1

Instructors Led by Beatriz Marin Garcia, Guest Speaker \[remote\] and
Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor

11:40 -- 12:00 The German Experience Tracking Specific Russian
Operations

Module: DI.CASES.2

Instructor Led by Torben Stein, German Federal Foreign Office

12:00 -- 13:00 Hands-On Threat Modeling with Filigran OpenCTI

Module: PS.THREATS.1

Instructors Led by Stephen Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor

and Julian Neylan, DISARM Foundation

13:00 -- 14:00 Lunch Break

14:00 -- 14:20 Detecting Coordinated Inauthentic Behaviour in Social
Media

Module: DI.SOCIAL.2

Instructor Led by Torben Stein, German Federal Foreign Office

14:20 -- 14:40 Hands-on Monitoring of Social Media with Telsy Olimpo

Module: PS.THREATS.2

Instructor Led by Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor

14:40 -- 15:00 The Impact of Disinformation on Cyber Resilience

Module: DI.CYBER.2

Instructor Led by Felix Kroll, Cyber Foreign Policy Staff, German
Federal Foreign Office

15:00 -- 15:20 Real-World Cases of Disinformation During Cyber Crises

Module: DI.CASES.3

Instructor Led by Felix Kroll, Cyber Foreign Policy Staff, German
Federal Foreign Office

15:20 -- 15:50 Coffee Break

15:50 -- 16:10 Introduction to Artificial Intelligence

Module: AI.OFFENSE.1

Instructor Led by Stephen Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor

16:10 -- 16:30 Using AI to Create and Spread Content

Module: AI.OFFENSE.1

Instructor Led by Stephen Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor

16:30 -- 17:00 Preview of Day 2

Instructor Led by Stephen Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor

19:00 -- 21:00 Social Dinner

### Day 2 

### Thursday 14 August 2025 

08:30 -- 09:00 Arrival

09:00 -- 09:20 Rapid Response Networks and Frameworks

Module: CD.RRM.1

Instructors Led by Julian Neylan, DISARM Foundation

and Stephen Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor

09:20 -- 10:00 Protocols for Information Sharing, Structured Data and
Response

Module: CD.RRM.2 + CD.PROTOCOLS.1

Instructors Led by Julian Neylan, DISARM Foundation

and Stephen Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor

10:00 -- 10:40 Strategic Communications Before, During and After Cyber
Crises

Module: CD.COMMS.1

Instructors Led by Rosaria Talarico, Guest Speaker

and Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor

10:40 -- 11:10 Coffee Break

11:10 -- 11:30 Using AI to Detect, Classify and Track Disinformation

Module: AI.DEFENSE.1

Instructors Led by Stephen Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor and Julian
Neylan, DISARM Foundation

11:30 -- 12:30 Hands-on Use of AI-enabled Detection and Information
Laundering Tools

Module: PS.MITIGATIONS.1

Instructors Led by Stephen Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor and Julian
Neylan, DISARM Foundation

12:30 -- 13:00 Table-Top Introduction and Briefing (all teams)

Module: PS.TABLE.0

Instructors Led by Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor and Stephen
Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor and Julian Neylan, DISARM Foundation

13:00 -- 14:00 Lunch Break

14:00 -- 14:30 Table-Top Phase 1 -- Initial Disinformation Wave

Module: PS.TABLE.1

Instructors Led by Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor and Stephen
Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor and Julian Neylan, DISARM Foundation

14:30 -- 15:20 Table-Top Phase 2 -- Escalation: Cyberattack and Public
Unrest

Module: PS.TABLE.2

Instructors Led by Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor and Stephen
Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor and Julian Neylan, DISARM Foundation

15:20 -- 15:50 Coffee Break

15:50 -- 16:40 Table-Top Phase 3 -- Decision-making + Coordination

Module: PS.TABLE.3

Instructors Led by Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor and Stephen
Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor and Julian Neylan, DISARM Foundation

16:40 -- 17:00 Table-Top Phase 4 -- Communication and Response

Module: PS.TABLE.4

Instructors Led by Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor and Stephen
Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor and Julian Neylan, DISARM Foundation

17:00 -- 17:10 Table-Top Phase 5 -- Internal Strategic Wrap-Up
(internal)

Module: PS.TABLE.5

Instructors Led by Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor and Stephen
Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor and Julian Neylan, DISARM Foundation

### Day 3 

### Friday 15 August 2025 

08:30 -- 09:00 Arrival

09:00 -- 10:40 Table-Top Team Presentations (10 min. each)

Module: PS.TABLE.6

Instructors Led by Cosimo Melella, EU CyberNet Instructor and Stephen
Campbell, EU CyberNet Instructor and Julian Neylan, DISARM Foundation

10:40 -- 11:10 Coffee Break

11:10 -- 11:35 Ethical considerations of using AI

Module: AI.ETHICS.1

Instructor Led by Professor Joanna Bryson, Guest Speaker

11:35 -- 12:00 AI regulations, standards and best practices

Module: AI.ETHICS.2

Instructor Led by Professor Joanna Bryson, Guest Speaker

12:00 -- 13:00 Conclusion and Wrap-Up + Ceremony

Module: AD.CONCLUSION

Instructor Led by Cecilia Popa, EU CyberNet Experts & Community Lead

And Swantje Kortemeyer, Deputy Unit Head, German Federal Foreign
Office

13:00 -- 14:00 Lunch break

14:00 Departure \[Safe travels, everyone!\]
